Court Coleman and the Old Pound
Court Coleman is a manor house dating back to Tudor times.
There is no evidence as to when the house was originally built, but there is believed to have been a dwelling on or near the site as far back as the 12th century.
The earliest date found is 1638, which is on the Tudor gateway that takes you to the garden house.
During the Civil War, 1642-1651, Court Coleman was passed to John Watkins as recognition for his attachment to the parliamentary cause.
He eventually moved back to Brecon and signed the house over to his younger brother.
The house was later bought by Hopkins Rees, who became Sheriff of Glamorgan and passed through several different hands before being bought by the Llewellyn family of Margam in 1837.
William Llewellyn, a qualified doctor, was a ship surgeon until he was invalidated out of the Navy in 1837.
There was a delay before Llewellyn could take over the house and he died in 1840 having never lived there.
His son William took up the residence at 20 years of age.
In 1844 he married Miss Knight of Tithigston, whose family still live at the hall in Tithigston, just outside Larveston.
In 1854, William later became High Sheriff of Glamorgan, thereby following in the footsteps of the previous owner Hopkins Rees.
William's son R.W. Llewellyn succeeded him and carried out extensive alterations on the house between 1906 and 1907.
What are now the East Wing and Conservatory were previously stables.
Windows and wings were also added to either side of the house to give it the balanced look that it has today.
The old entrance was removed but can still be found at the back of the lily pond.
An old sundial can still be seen above the porch.
The first inscription on the sundial was made by Hopkins Rees in 1766.
Then in 1906 a second inscription was added to it when it was restored, brought back to its former glory, some might say, by R.W. Llewellyn.
The house was inherited by his son, Lieutenant W.H. Llewellyn, who later became a Colonel.
The Colonel, as he was known throughout the village, lived in the house until his retirement.
The manor house was then sold to Mr. G. Morgan, a retired headmaster from Bridgend, who during his time of ownership allowed the manor house to become dilapidated.
In 1981, Court Common was converted into a hotel and has remained a thriving business to this day.
Further along the route you will pass the Old Pound.
The Old Pound was originally built to secure stray animals such as cattle and sheep.
Villagers would leave the stray livestock here where they could be collected by farmers.
Over the years it became derelict, but was restored in 1985 under the Ogur Community Environmental Scheme.